
Aesop's Fables Translated by George Fyler Townsend




The Wolf and the Lamb

WOLF, meeting with a Lamb astray from the fold, resolved not to
lay violent hands on him, but to find some plea to justify to the
Lamb the Wolf's right to eat him.  He thus addressed him:
"Sirrah, last year you grossly insulted me."  "Indeed," bleated
the Lamb in a mournful tone of voice, "I was not then born."  Then
said the Wolf, "You feed in my pasture."  "No, good sir," replied
the Lamb, "I have not yet tasted grass."  Again said the Wolf,
"You drink of my well."  "No," exclaimed the Lamb, "I never yet
drank water, for as yet my mother's milk is both food and drink
to me."  Upon which the Wolf seized him and ate him up, saying,
"Well! I won't remain supperless, even though you refute every
one of my imputations."  The tyrant will always find a pretext for
his tyranny.


The Bat and the Weasels

A BAT who fell upon the ground and was caught by a Weasel pleaded
to be spared his life.  The Weasel refused, saying that he was by
nature the enemy of all birds.  The Bat assured him that he was
not a bird, but a mouse, and thus was set free.  Shortly
afterwards the Bat again fell to the ground and was caught by
another Weasel, whom he likewise entreated not to eat him.  The
Weasel said that he had a special hostility to mice.  The Bat
assured him that he was not a mouse, but a bat, and thus a second
time escaped.

It is wise to turn circumstances to good account.


The Ass and the Grasshopper

AN ASS having heard some Grasshoppers chirping, was highly
enchanted; and, desiring to possess the same charms of melody,
demanded what sort of food they lived on to give them such
beautiful voices.  They replied, "The dew."  The Ass resolved that
he would live only upon dew, and in a short time died of hunger.


The Lion and the Mouse

A LION was awakened from sleep by a Mouse running over his face.
Rising up angrily, he caught him and was about to kill him, when
the Mouse piteously entreated, saying:  "If you would only spare
my life, I would be sure to repay your kindness."  The Lion
laughed and let him go.  It happened shortly after this that the
Lion was caught by some hunters, who bound him by st ropes to the
ground.  The Mouse, recognizing his roar, came gnawed the rope
with his teeth, and set him free, exclaim

"You ridiculed the idea of my ever being able to help you,
expecting to receive from me any repayment of your favor; I now
you know that it is possible for even a Mouse to con benefits on
a Lion."


The Charcoal-Burner and the Fuller

A CHARCOAL-BURNER carried on his trade in his own house.  One day
he met a friend, a Fuller, and entreated him to come and live
with him, saying that they should be far better neighbors and
that their housekeeping expenses would be lessened.  The Fuller
replied, "The arrangement is impossible as far as I am concerned,
for whatever I should whiten, you would immediately blacken again
with your charcoal."

Like will draw like.


The Father and His Sons

A FATHER had a family of sons who were perpetually quarreling
among themselves.  When he failed to heal their disputes by his
exhortations, he determined to give them a practical illustration
of the evils of disunion; and for this purpose he one day told
them to bring him a bundle of sticks.  When they had done so, he
placed the faggot into the hands of each of them in succession,
and ordered them to break it in pieces.  They tried with all
their strength, and were not able to do it.  He next opened the
faggot, took the sticks separately, one by one, and again put
them into his sons' hands, upon which they broke them easily.  He
then addressed them in these words:  "My sons, if you are of one
mind, and unite to assist each other, you will be as this faggot,
uninjured by all the attempts of your enemies; but if you are
divided among yourselves, you will be broken as easily as these
sticks."


The Boy Hunting Locusts

A BOY was hunting for locusts.  He had caught a goodly number,
when he saw a Scorpion, and mistaking him for a locust, reached
out his hand to take him.  The Scorpion, showing his sting, said:
If you had but touched me, my friend, you would have lost me, and
all your locusts too!"


The Cock and the Jewel

A COCK, scratching for food for himself and his hens, found a
precious stone and exclaimed:  "If your owner had found thee, and
not I, he would have taken thee up, and have set thee in thy
first estate; but I have found thee for no purpose.  I would
rather have one barleycorn than all the jewels in the world."


The Kingdom of the Lion

THE BEASTS of the field and forest had a Lion as their king.  He
was neither wrathful, cruel, nor tyrannical, but just and gentle
as a king could be.  During his reign he made a royal
proclamation for a general assembly of all the birds and beasts,
and drew up conditions for a universal league, in which the Wolf
and the Lamb, the Panther and the Kid, the Tiger and the Stag,
the Dog and the Hare, should live together in perfect peace and
amity.  The Hare said, "Oh, how I have longed to see this day, in
which the weak shall take their place with impunity by the side
of the strong."  And after the Hare said this, he ran for his
life.


The Wolf and the Crane

A WOLF who had a bone stuck in his throat hired a Crane, for a
large sum, to put her head into his mouth and draw out the bone.
When the Crane had extracted the bone and demanded the promised
payment, the Wolf, grinning and grinding his teeth, exclaimed:
"Why, you have surely already had a sufficient recompense, in
having been permitted to draw out your head in safety from the
mouth and jaws of a wolf."

In serving the wicked, expect no reward, and be thankful if you
escape injury for your pains.


The Fisherman Piping

A FISHERMAN skilled in music took his flute and his nets to the
seashore.  Standing on a projecting rock, he played several tunes
in the hope that the fish, attracted by his melody, would of
their own accord dance into his net, which he had placed below.
At last, having long waited in vain, he laid aside his flute, and
casting his net into the sea, made an excellent haul of fish.
When he saw them leaping about in the net upon the rock he said:
"O you most perverse creatures, when I piped you would not dance,
but now that I have ceased you do so merrily."


Hercules and the Wagoner

A CARTER was driving a wagon along a country lane, when the
wheels sank down deep into a rut.  The rustic driver, stupefied
and aghast, stood looking at the wagon, and did nothing but utter
loud cries to Hercules to come and help him.  Hercules, it is
said, appeared and thus addressed him:  "Put your shoulders to the
wheels, my man.  Goad on your bullocks, and never more pray to me
for help, until you have done your best to help yourself, or
depend upon it you will henceforth pray in vain."

Self-help is the best help.


The Ants and the Grasshopper

THE ANTS were spending a fine winter's day drying grain collected
in the summertime.  A Grasshopper, perishing with famine, passed
by and earnestly begged for a little food.  The Ants inquired of
him, "Why did you not treasure up food during the summer?'  He
replied, "I had not leisure enough.  I passed the days in
singing."  They then said in derision:  "If you were foolish enough
to sing all the summer, you must dance supperless to bed in the
winter."


The Traveler and His Dog

A TRAVELER about to set out on a journey saw his Dog stand at the
door stretching himself.  He asked him sharply:  "Why do you stand
there gaping? Everything is ready but you, so come with me
instantly."  The Dog, wagging his tail, replied:  "O, master! I am
quite ready; it is you for whom I am waiting."

The loiterer often blames delay on his more active friend.


Fables of Aesop examined.  By the Honorable Charles Boyle.